# Semantic Pass

**What does the semantic pass do?**

The semantic pass analyzes the AST (Abstract Syntax Tree) generated by
the parser; it checks for semantic errors (type checking, scope resolution and
variable shadowing, ...) at compile time and resolves the symbols for the nodes
in the AST.

Orn currently has four main phases in the semantic pass:

This code will help to ilustrate each phase:

```orn
type Num = int;

const MAX: Num = 100;

struct Point {
	x: Num;
	y: Num;
}

fn dist(p: Point) -> int {
	ret p.x + p.y;
}

fn main() -> int {
	let p = Point { x: 3, y: 4 };
	ret dist(p);
}
```

All phases work with the information that the previous phases collected.

## Top hoisting

Global scope signatures symbols are collected first, therefore making the
declaration order at the global scope irrelevant. It only looks for signatures
due to that an object member or function params can be type of another object,
and that object can be not collected yet.

What this phase sees is:

```orn
type Num

const MAX

struct Point

fn dist

fn main
```

## Type resolution

At the type resolution phase, the aliases and  the objects symbols (structs and
enums) are resolved. Each object symbol gets their members symbols resolved and
so does the type alias symbol. Any unknown type at this point means that it has
not been declared, as we had collected all the signatures at the previous phase.

What this phase sees is:

```orn
type Num = int;

struct Point {
	x: Num;
	y: Num;
}
```

## Function signature and top level declaration resolution

You'll be asking why is function signature resolution a different phase than
the type resolution? Functions can be members of objects thanks to `impl` blocks
and these functions needs to be appended to the object's members, but the object
needs to be resolved first.

Consts and global scope variables are also resolved at the third phase, this
declarations depend on the types that have to be previously resolved.

What this phase sees is:

```orn
const MAX: Num = 100;

fn dist(p: Point) -> int

fn main() -> int
```

## Bodies check

Now that all the information that we could need is gathered, we can dive into
the bodies and check; types, mutability, returns, name space access, etc. all
of this is done at this phase.

What this phase sees is:

```orn
fn dist(p: Point) -> int {
	ret p.x + p.y;
}

fn main() -> int {
	let p = Point { x: 3, y: 4 };
	ret dist(p);
}
```
